plant disease symptoms.
plant disease- cure in conversational format.
which seeds are best for which crop.(5-6)
which fertilizers are best for particular crops(5-6)
any no. of goverment scheme which can be recommended to the farmers.
questions like how much fertilizer should be used with the crop.

5 crops-   potato  sugercane  rice   tomato    cotton

potato diseases and symptoms:
1.Bacterialwilt Causalorgansm
Leaves become yellow at their bases.When stems are cut a brown colored ring will be visible.
When a tuber is cut in half, black or brown rings will, however, be visible.
If left for a while or squeezed, these rings will exude a thick white fluid.
fluid coming out of tuber eyes. 

Control Measures:
Certified seed free from brown rot disease should be planted.
In case cut potato tubers are being used, they should be kept at 12ยบ C for four days so that the cut surface hardens. 
The tubers can also be treated with the solution of Aretan or Agallol.
The crop debris should be collected and burnt.

2.Late Blight
leaves appear blistered as if scalded by hot water and eventually rot and dry out. 
When drying out, leaves turn brown or black in color. 
When infections are still active, spots appear on the underside of leaves blanketed in what looks like flour. 
Affected stems begin to blacken from their tips, and eventually dry out.
all foliage to rot, dry out and fall to the ground, stems to dry out and plants to die. 
Affected tubers display dry brown-colored spots on their skins and flesh. 

Control Measures:
Use potato tubers for seed from disease free areas to ensure that the pathogen is not carried through seed tuber.
The infected plant material in the field should be properly destroyed.
Grow resistant varieties like Kufri Navtal.
Fungicidal sprays can be effective, if given properly and timely. 
Sprays should  start a few days before the anticipated time of occurrence of the disease or on the appearance of initial symptoms. 
Cool humid atmosphere favours the disease and prevalence of such weather can be indication of disease in a short time ahead. 
Spraying should be done with Dithane M-45 or Dithane Z-78 (2.5 kg per 1000 litres of water per hectare). 
Spraying should be repeated at 10-12 days interval.

3.Early Blight
Early Blight

Control Measures:
Fungicidal sprays, preferably with copper fungicides or Zineb given at 15 day intervals effectively control the disease.
Since the same spray schedule controls late blight also, iEarly Blightt has become a regular practice among potato growers in many tracts to spray the crop with copper fungicides at least three or four times, starting from about six weeks after planting.


Sugarcane diseases and symptoms:
1.Eye spot 
Small water-soaked spots on leaves; elongated water-soaked spots in shape of an eye; 
straw colored lesions with reddish brown center develop from water-soaked lesions.

Control Measures:
Disease can be controlled through the application of appropriate foliar fungicides.

2.Red rot 
Yellowing, drying leaves; elongated red lesions on leaf midribs which may develop a straw yellow center; 
splitting open the stalk lengthwise reveals reddish patches of tissue interrupted by white areas; vascular tissue may also be red

Control Measures:
Planting resistant varieties of sugar cane is the most effective method of controlling the disease; 
remove crop debris from the plantation to reduce inoculum levels; 
rogue diseased plants; harvest crop promptly if growing a susceptible variety; 
treating seed pieces with hot water prior to planting can reduce the incidence of the disease but foliar fungicide application has proved to be an ineffective method of control

3.Sugarcane smut disease
Stunted growth of sugarcane stools; 
profuse production of tillers; 
shortened internodes; stems thin with narrow, erect leaves; black whip-like structure emerging from terminal bud

Control Measures:
controlled by planting varieties of sugarcane which are resistant to the disease; 
disease can usually be eliminated from seed pieces by hot water treatment prior to planting; infected plants should be removed


Rice Diseases and symptom:
1.Blast
appearance of spindle-shaped spots with ashy centers. If it's a panicle blast, the panicle gets blackened and shriveled.

Control measures:
Remove weeds from the field.  Stick to the recommended dose and timing for the fertilizers.
Soak the seeds for 12 hours in @1.0 g/l carbendazim solution before sowing in the nursery beds or in the direct sown crop.
Repeat the same process before transplanting the rice crops.
Crops should be sprayed by 2-3 sprays of tricyclazole @0.6 g/l at an interval of 12 days to protect the crops.

2.Leaf Scald
alternate zones of light and dark yellow color that appear on leaf tips or on the margins.

Control Measures:
Spray carbendazim @ 1.0 g/l. Spray the plants thrice at 15 days intervals after you notice their appearance on the crops.

3.Sheath Blight
Appearance of spots or lesions o leaf sheaths. 
Lesions are oblong in shape and large in size with a grayish center and purple reddish margins. 
In extreme situations, the lesions spread from to the leaf blades as well. 
In the advanced stages, dark brown sclerotia are also visible.

Control Measures:
Use Pseudomonas fluorescence-based formulations as soil application @ 2.5 kg/ha.
Apply foliar spray of validamycin @ 2.5 ml/l or iprodione plus carbendazim (200 g/acre).


Tomato Diseases and Symptoms:
1.Anthracnose
circular lesions on the fruit; 
the indentations on may have visible concentric brown and yellow rings; 
lesion centers turn tan in color as they mature and become dotted with small black fungal fruiting bodies (microsclerotia); 
lesions can grow very large

Control Measures:
Avoid sprinkler irrigation when fruit is ripening; rotate crops with other non-solanaceous plants

2.Black mold
the appearance of black or brown lesions on the surface of ripe fruit; 
lesions may be tiny flecks or may be large patches of decaying tissue; 
during periods of humid weather, the lesions may become covered in black, 
velvety spore masses.

Control Measures:
avoiding wetting the foliage when watering and harvesting fruits as soon as they are ripe can help to reduce the incidence of the disease; 
in areas where disease is a persistent problem, chemical control may be necessary with an appropriate fungicide; 
fungicide is usually applied 4-6 weeks prior to the first anticipated fruit harvest.

3.Early blight
oval shaped lesions with a yellow chlorotic region across the lesion; 
concentric leaf lesions may be seen on infected leaves; 
leaf tissue between veins is destroyed; 
severe infections can cause leaves to completely collapse; 
as the disease progresses leaves become severely blighted leading to reduced yield; 
tomato stems may become infected with the fungus leading to Alternaria stem canker; 
initial symptoms of of stem canker are the development of dark brown regions on the stem; 
stem cankers may enlarge to girdle the whole stem resulting in the death of the whole plant; 
brown streaks can be found in the vascular tissue above and below the canker region; 
fruit symptoms include small black v-shaped lesions at the shoulders of the fruit (the disease is also known black shoulder); 
lesions may also appear on the fruit as dark flecks with concentric ring pattern; 
fruit lesions can seen in the field or may develop during fruit transit to the market; 
the lesions may have a velvety appearance caused by sporulation of the fungus

Control Measures:
Apply appropriate fungicide at first sign of disease; 
destroy any volunteer solanaceous plants (tomato, potato, nightshade etc); 
practice crop rotation

4.Fusarium wilt
yellowing and wilting of leaves on one side of the leaf midrib or plant; 
one-sided symptoms are caused by a blockage in the vascular system supplying the symptomatic side of the plant; 
as the disease progresses, older leaves become necrotic and the plant begins to wilt; 
fruit on infected plants is smaller and yield is reduced; damage to leaves makes fruit susceptible to sunscald; 
stem symptoms may be mistaken for bacterial wilt but a bacterial ooze test will be negative; stem tissue becomes discolored brown

Control Measures:
Plant resistant varieties; sanitize all equipment regularly; 
control root knot nematodes; rotate crops away from tomato for several years

Cotton Diseases and symptoms:
1.Alternaria leaf spot
Small, circular brown lesions on cotyledons and seedling leaves which expand and develop a concentric pattern; 
necrotic areas coalesce and often have a purple margin; 
centers of lesions may dry out and drop form the plant creating a "shot-hole" appearance on the leaves.

Control Measures:
Plow crop residue into the soil to reduce inoculum levels; 
provide plants with adequate irrigation and nutrients, particularly potassium; 
applications of appropriate foliar fungicides may be required on susceptible cultivars.

2.Asochyta blight
Brown or gray spots on leaves surrounded by a red halo; 
elongated red-purple cankers on stems cause the wilting and death of leaves above.

Control Measures:
plow crop debris into soil after harvest; crop rotation has little to no effect of control of disease.

3.Cercospora leaf spot
Circular red lesions on leaves which enlarge and turn white or gray in the center; 
lesions often have a pattern of concentric rings and possess a red margin; 
dark gray spore masses form in the centers of the lesions making them appear dark gray.

Control Measures:
Plow crop residue into the soil to reduce inoculum levels; 
provide plants with adequate irrigation and nutrients; 
applications of appropriate foliar fungicides may be required on susceptible cultivars.

4.Fusarium wilt
cotyledons become chlorotic at the edges and then necrotic; 
older plants exhibit symptoms of wilting and leaf chlorosis; 
wilting is usually gradual but may be pronounced after heavy summer rain; 
if infection is severe plants become stunted and may be killed; 
vascular system of infected plants becomes discolored and can be seen by cutting the stem.

Control Measures:
Use on certified, disease-free seed; plant varieties with higher resistance to the disease in areas with a history of Fusarium diseases; 
fumigating the soil may reduce disease incidence.
